BLACKOUT

I first heard about the eclipse a year ago. It was a once in a lifetime event. Headlines like that circulated. So I looked and sure enough, it was. The next time a full eclipse splashes its shadow across the lower 48, I will be long dead. The moon moves across the path of sun all the time. But those paths cross places like the middle of the Pacific where no humans are likely to be.

Hotels fill up along the path of totality, where the sun would be in total blackness. From Oregon in the West to the Carolinas, campsites and podunk towns prepare for the influx of geeks with an astronomical bent. Some towns don't believe the hype. Others don't get what they expected. Stores run out of basic supplies and food. Roads experience gridlock for the first time. Small towns sprout overnight in remote desert locations where human eyes train upward.

The morning of the eclipse, I take my usual train into Seattle. Despite being far from the path of totality, the air feels crisper. Electric. When I step into the rooftop party, I am pleasantly surprised. The downtown roofdeck overlooking the Sound is packed with engineers and fellow science nerds. Eclipse glasses made of paper and industrial tin foil are handed out. The more industrious have made their own pinhole viewers. 

I am home. 

Rows and rows of humans gawk at the clear sky. Eclipses are mundane on a galactic scale, but on a human scale, it is holy. As the moon blocks sunlight, the air temperature drops in minute degrees too small to be noticed. Visible light dims to twilight levels. 

I look through my solar shielding. The edge of moon is crisp against a backdrop of the sun. And over the course of 30 minutes, it slides across the face of our local star, blocking about 80% of its surface at maximum.

I witness history.

I look around the rooftop. So many different conversations occur. But mostly, people take those moments to watch silently as the moon follows its routine path through space about a quarter millions miles away. One young female engineer never takes her eyes from the sky, eclipse glasses secured against her face. I smile. I understand. 

I didn't want to leave. I wanted to remember. I wanted to stay in that moment. Moments where I knew I belonged. 

I remember the other times. Times I didn't question that I belonged. 

I was 13 and recently inducted into MathCamp. Yes, there was a real place called MathCamp. On the University of Arizona campus, I spent a weekend with a small group of middle school kids studying things like Fibonacci numbers and recursive algorithms. I played speed chess for the first time. We had late night access to the cafeteria where soft serve ice cream flowed freely. We posed for silly pictures and became instant friends.

There was also the selfie from under the rings of Saturn. The Cassini spacecraft had traveled for years. It finally arrived. And one of the images sent back was from the far side of that gas giant. A clever human annotated an arrow on the black parts of the image, pointing at a small bluish dot -- Earth.

That moment literally took my breath away.

I was standing somewhere beneath the rings of Saturn. They were vibrant. Brilliant. I was 9.5AUs from the sun -- that is 9.5 times farther away from the sun than usual. I'm surrounded mostly by black and a looming planet that occupies the majority of my vision. And far away in the vastness of inky space, a blue dot flows by carrying a few billion humans. This is the first time we see ourselves from a distance. Other crafts have gone farther, but they've never sent back a color picture of our miniscule home represented simply by a point of light.

The moment conjures an awe I rarely experience. I felt it on the rooftop watching an eclipse with fellow science lovers. It is easy to believe we're the apex of evolution. It's easy to think there's no other life out there, at least other life within human reach. It is human habit to focus on our own importance. That our big blue globe is the only thing that matters. And we war among ourselves to carve out limited resources. 

This is the unfortunate state of the human condition. But when those few precious moments come, I soak myself in the galactic perspective. I stand under the icy rings of Saturn. I snap photos of hexagonal storms whirring away at the northern pole of Neptune. I am Voyager1 40 years away, crossing the outer edges of the heliosphere, sending home audio recordings that oddly sound like whalesong. And once in a while, my fellow nerds join me in a moment of reverence. 

I am home. 
